doc/QUICK_START_OPTIMIZATIONS.md, before:

# ⚡ Quick Start: Multi-Language Optimizations

## 🎯 Bottom Line

**Your multi-language videos are now 2-3x faster with pipelined two-pass execution!**

- **Before**: 33-min video = 44 min processing
- **After**: 33-min video = 15-20 min processing (2-3x faster)

## 🚀 What Changed (v4.0.0)

### 1. **Two-Pass Smart Detection** - 3x faster than single-pass
- Pass 1: Base model finds language boundaries (fast + accurate)
- Pass 2: Medium model transcribes each segment (accurate)
- **Why base, not tiny?** Tiny drops words, base is perfect balance
- **Impact**: 33 min → 19.5 min

### 2. **Pipelined Execution** - Additional 1.2x speedup
- Pass 1 and Pass 2 run CONCURRENTLY using separate model instances
- As soon as segments are detected, transcription starts immediately
- Both passes overlap instead of waiting
- **Impact**: 19.5 min → 15-20 min

### 3. **Model Reuse** - Saves 10-20 minutes
- Old: Loaded Whisper model 100+ times
- New: Load once per pass, reuse for all chunks
- **Impact**: 8-10 seconds × 100 calls = 13+ min saved

### 4. **In-Memory Audio** - Eliminates I/O overhead
- Old: Create/read/delete temp file for every chunk
- New: Load audio once with librosa, slice in RAM
- **Impact**: 3-6 seconds saved (more on slow disks)

## ⚙️ Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 📖 Usage

**No code changes needed!** Just use the GUI:

```bash
python gui_qt.py
```

1. Select your video
2. Choose languages (e.g., Czech + English)
3. Click "Transcribe"
4. Watch it process 2-3x faster! 🚀

## 🔧 Configuration

### Pipelined Two-Pass (Automatic)

The system automatically uses:
- **Pass 1**: Base model for fast language detection
- **Pass 2**: Medium model for accurate transcription
- **Pipelined**: Both passes run concurrently

No configuration needed - works out of the box!

### Optional: Change Models

To use different models, edit `transcription/enhanced.py` line 212 or 308:

```python
detection_model='base',        # Try 'tiny' for even faster (but less accurate)
transcription_model='medium',  # Try 'large' for best quality (slower)
```

**Recommended**: Keep base for detection (sweet spot: fast + accurate)

## 📊 Performance Details

### Example: 33-minute Czech/English video

#### Before (v3.3.0):
```
1. Initial transcription: 180s (3 min)
2. Heuristic analysis: 5s
3. Audio fallback: 10,395s (173 min) ⚠️
   - 990 chunks × 10.5s each
   - Load model (8s) + extract (0.5s) + transcribe (2s)
TOTAL: 176 minutes 😱
```

#### After (v4.0.0) - Pipelined Two-Pass:
```
1. Heuristic analysis: 5s (skipped initial transcription)
2. Two-pass pipelined segmentation: ~240s (4 min) ✅

   Pass 1 (detection): 990 chunks × 0.2s (base + faster-whisper) = 198s
   Pass 2 (transcription): 3 segments × 12s (medium + faster-whisper) = 36s

   OVERLAP: Both passes run concurrently!
   - Pass 2 starts as soon as first segment detected
   - Total time ≈ Pass 1 duration (198s) since Pass 2 overlaps

TOTAL: ~4 minutes 🚀
```

**Speedup: 44x faster!**

*Note: With faster-whisper installed. Without it, expect ~8-10x speedup.*

## 🎨 Language Pairs Optimized

These language combinations benefit most (when heuristic triggers audio fallback):

- ✅ Czech ↔ English
- ✅ Spanish ↔ English
- ✅ Polish ↔ English
- ✅ Any language pair with close heuristic scores

Single-language videos are already fast (no change needed).

## 🛡️ Thread Safety & Pipelining

### How Pipelining Works:

**Problem**: Whisper model is NOT thread-safe
- Multiple threads using SAME model → deadlock/crash

**Solution**: Pipelined execution with SEPARATE model instances
- Pass 1 thread: Uses detection model (base)
- Pass 2 thread: Uses transcription model (medium)
- **Different models = no conflict!** ✓
- Both passes run concurrently, overlapping for maximum speed

### Why This Is Fast:

- Pass 1 detects language boundaries (fast base model)
- As soon as a segment is complete, it's queued for Pass 2
- Pass 2 transcribes segments while Pass 1 continues detecting
- Total time ≈ Pass 1 duration (Pass 2 completes during Pass 1)
- Queue provides backpressure if Pass 2 falls behind

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### "Process seems slow"

**Check CPU usage**: Should see ~200-300% during chunk processing

```bash
top  # Look for Python process
```

If CPU < 200%: Try reducing workers to 2

### "ImportError: librosa"

**Solution 1**: Install it
```bash
pip install librosa soundfile
```

**Solution 2**: Ignore (fallback to ffmpeg works fine, still gets parallel + model reuse)

### "Process hanging"

- FFmpeg has 10-second timeout (auto-recovers)
- Check logs for timeout warnings
- Reduce workers if system low on RAM

## 📈 Benchmarking

To test on your own videos:

```bash
# Install time command if needed
sudo apt-get install time

# Run transcription with timing
time python3 -c "
from transcription.enhanced import EnhancedTranscriber
t = EnhancedTranscriber()
result = t.transcribe_multilang(
    'your_video.mp4',
    allowed_languages=['cs', 'en'],
    detect_language_changes=True
)
print(f'Detected {len(result[\"language_segments\"])} segments')
"
```

## 📝 Files Changed

- `transcription/enhanced.py` - Core optimizations
- `requirements.txt` - Added librosa, soundfile
- `PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md` - Detailed docs
- `QUICK_START_OPTIMIZATIONS.md` - This file

## 🔄 Compatibility

- ✅ Same API (no breaking changes)
- ✅ Same accuracy (language detection unchanged)
- ✅ Graceful fallbacks (works without librosa)
- ✅ Backward compatible

## 📚 More Info

See `PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md` for:
- Detailed technical explanations
- Architecture diagrams
- Advanced configuration
- Accuracy validation

## 🎉 Summary

Your multi-language transcriptions are now:

- ⚡ **10-40x faster** overall (with faster-whisper)
- 🎯 **100% accurate** (smarter two-pass detection)
- 💪 **More robust** (pipelined execution, better error handling)
- 🔄 **Compatible** (no code changes needed)
- 🧠 **Smarter** (base model doesn't drop words like tiny)

**Just run it and enjoy the speed!** 🚀

### Key Innovations:
1. **Two-pass approach**: Fast detection + accurate transcription
2. **Pipelined execution**: Both passes run concurrently
3. **faster-whisper**: 4-5x faster inference via CTranslate2
4. **Smart model selection**: Base for detection (not tiny)

---

**Version**: 4.0.0
**Date**: 2025-11-16
**Branch**: `claude/optimize-multilang-performance-01ShfCQFgqXUDvxjVGLBwtBi`
**Latest update:**
- Rebranded to FonixFlow
- UI improvements: logo in top bar, auto-jump to transcript tab

Commit message:

Upgrade license system, .spec files, and documentation for offline/online validation

doc/QUICK_START_OPTIMIZATIONS.md, after:

# ⚡ Quick Start: Multi-Language Optimizations

## 🎯 Bottom Line

**Your multi-language videos are now 2-3x faster with pipelined two-pass execution!**

- **Before**: 33-min video = 44 min processing
- **After**: 33-min video = 15-20 min processing (2-3x faster)

## 🚀 What Changed (v4.0.0)

### 1. **Two-Pass Smart Detection** - 3x faster than single-pass
- Pass 1: Base model finds language boundaries (fast + accurate)
- Pass 2: Medium model transcribes each segment (accurate)
- **Why base, not tiny?** Tiny drops words, base is perfect balance
- **Impact**: 33 min → 19.5 min

### 2. **Pipelined Execution** - Additional 1.2x speedup
- Pass 1 and Pass 2 run CONCURRENTLY using separate model instances
- As soon as segments are detected, transcription starts immediately
- Both passes overlap instead of waiting
- **Impact**: 19.5 min → 15-20 min

### 3. **Model Reuse** - Saves 10-20 minutes
- Old: Loaded Whisper model 100+ times
- New: Load once per pass, reuse for all chunks
- **Impact**: 8-10 seconds × 100 calls = 13+ min saved

### 4. **In-Memory Audio** - Eliminates I/O overhead
- Old: Create/read/delete temp file for every chunk
- New: Load audio once with librosa, slice in RAM
- **Impact**: 3-6 seconds saved (more on slow disks)


## ⚙️ Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 🔑 License System

FonixFlow supports both offline and online license validation:

- Add your license key to `licenses.txt` for offline use
- If not found locally, the app checks LemonSqueezy API

## 📖 Usage

**No code changes needed!** Just use the GUI:

```bash
python gui_qt.py
```

1. Select your video
2. Choose languages (e.g., Czech + English)
3. Click "Transcribe"
4. Watch it process 2-3x faster! 🚀

## 🔧 Configuration

### Pipelined Two-Pass (Automatic)

The system automatically uses:
- **Pass 1**: Base model for fast language detection
- **Pass 2**: Medium model for accurate transcription
- **Pipelined**: Both passes run concurrently

No configuration needed - works out of the box!

### Optional: Change Models

To use different models, edit `transcription/enhanced.py` line 212 or 308:

```python
detection_model='base',        # Try 'tiny' for even faster (but less accurate)
transcription_model='medium',  # Try 'large' for best quality (slower)
```

**Recommended**: Keep base for detection (sweet spot: fast + accurate)

## 📊 Performance Details

### Example: 33-minute Czech/English video

#### Before (v3.3.0):
```
1. Initial transcription: 180s (3 min)
2. Heuristic analysis: 5s
3. Audio fallback: 10,395s (173 min) ⚠️
   - 990 chunks × 10.5s each
   - Load model (8s) + extract (0.5s) + transcribe (2s)
TOTAL: 176 minutes 😱
```

#### After (v4.0.0) - Pipelined Two-Pass:
```
1. Heuristic analysis: 5s (skipped initial transcription)
2. Two-pass pipelined segmentation: ~240s (4 min) ✅

   Pass 1 (detection): 990 chunks × 0.2s (base + faster-whisper) = 198s
   Pass 2 (transcription): 3 segments × 12s (medium + faster-whisper) = 36s

   OVERLAP: Both passes run concurrently!
   - Pass 2 starts as soon as first segment detected
   - Total time ≈ Pass 1 duration (198s) since Pass 2 overlaps

TOTAL: ~4 minutes 🚀
```

**Speedup: 44x faster!**

*Note: With faster-whisper installed. Without it, expect ~8-10x speedup.*

## 🎨 Language Pairs Optimized

These language combinations benefit most (when heuristic triggers audio fallback):

- ✅ Czech ↔ English
- ✅ Spanish ↔ English
- ✅ Polish ↔ English
- ✅ Any language pair with close heuristic scores

Single-language videos are already fast (no change needed).

## 🛡️ Thread Safety & Pipelining

### How Pipelining Works:

**Problem**: Whisper model is NOT thread-safe
- Multiple threads using SAME model → deadlock/crash

**Solution**: Pipelined execution with SEPARATE model instances
- Pass 1 thread: Uses detection model (base)
- Pass 2 thread: Uses transcription model (medium)
- **Different models = no conflict!** ✓
- Both passes run concurrently, overlapping for maximum speed

### Why This Is Fast:

- Pass 1 detects language boundaries (fast base model)
- As soon as a segment is complete, it's queued for Pass 2
- Pass 2 transcribes segments while Pass 1 continues detecting
- Total time ≈ Pass 1 duration (Pass 2 completes during Pass 1)
- Queue provides backpressure if Pass 2 falls behind

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### "Process seems slow"

**Check CPU usage**: Should see ~200-300% during chunk processing

```bash
top  # Look for Python process
```

If CPU < 200%: Try reducing workers to 2

### "ImportError: librosa"

**Solution 1**: Install it
```bash
pip install librosa soundfile
```

**Solution 2**: Ignore (fallback to ffmpeg works fine, still gets parallel + model reuse)

### "Process hanging"

- FFmpeg has 10-second timeout (auto-recovers)
- Check logs for timeout warnings
- Reduce workers if system low on RAM

## 📈 Benchmarking

To test on your own videos:

```bash
# Install time command if needed
sudo apt-get install time

# Run transcription with timing
time python3 -c "
from transcription.enhanced import EnhancedTranscriber
t = EnhancedTranscriber()
result = t.transcribe_multilang(
    'your_video.mp4',
    allowed_languages=['cs', 'en'],
    detect_language_changes=True
)
print(f'Detected {len(result[\"language_segments\"])} segments')
"
```

## 📝 Files Changed

- `transcription/enhanced.py` - Core optimizations
- `requirements.txt` - Added librosa, soundfile
- `PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md` - Detailed docs
- `QUICK_START_OPTIMIZATIONS.md` - This file

## 🔄 Compatibility

- ✅ Same API (no breaking changes)
- ✅ Same accuracy (language detection unchanged)
- ✅ Graceful fallbacks (works without librosa)
- ✅ Backward compatible

## 📚 More Info

See `PERFORMANCE_OPTIMIZATION_GUIDE.md` for:
- Detailed technical explanations
- Architecture diagrams
- Advanced configuration
- Accuracy validation

## 🎉 Summary

Your multi-language transcriptions are now:

- ⚡ **10-40x faster** overall (with faster-whisper)
- 🎯 **100% accurate** (smarter two-pass detection)
- 💪 **More robust** (pipelined execution, better error handling)
- 🔄 **Compatible** (no code changes needed)
- 🧠 **Smarter** (base model doesn't drop words like tiny)

**Just run it and enjoy the speed!** 🚀

### Key Innovations:
1. **Two-pass approach**: Fast detection + accurate transcription
2. **Pipelined execution**: Both passes run concurrently
3. **faster-whisper**: 4-5x faster inference via CTranslate2
4. **Smart model selection**: Base for detection (not tiny)

---

**Version**: 4.0.0
**Date**: 2025-11-16
**Branch**: `claude/optimize-multilang-performance-01ShfCQFgqXUDvxjVGLBwtBi`
**Latest update:**
- Rebranded to FonixFlow
- UI improvements: logo in top bar, auto-jump to transcript tab
